Technologies for equine welfare and performance monitoring under field conditions – Where do we stand?

Abstract

The need for comprehensive equine welfare assessments has become particularly evident amid ongoing debates about the social licence to operate in equestrian sports. During exercise, multiple physiological systems, principally the cardiovascular, respiratory, muscular, thermoregulatory, endocrine, and locomotory systems, undergo complex adaptations. To monitor and determine equine welfare, an approach that focuses on the quantitative monitoring of both physiological and psychological parameters to determine and understand the impact of equestrian sports on horses is essential. Existing and emerging technologies that allow for the quantitative assessment of such parameters have developed rapidly over the past two decades and have increasingly enabled precise monitoring of horses, though the available tools vary depending on the parameter of interest. This review explores current technologies for measuring parameters associated with these physiological systems and their practical applications in assessing equine well‐being. The focus lies on validated technologies for which accuracy and precision have been determined. The aim of this review is to present an overview of current technologies available for the measurement of both physiological and psychological parameters in horses during exercise and to what extent they can be used under field conditions. The review concludes by discussing promising innovations that, while still in early development, could significantly contribute to equine welfare and the broader social licence to operate debate.

INTRODUCTION

In the current era where horses are mainly used for sports and leisure, there is an attitude change going on with respect to the use of animals by humans. It is moving away from the long‐time almost exclusively utilitarian perspective to a view that includes the welfare of the animal. This is largely driven by advancing insights into animal cognition and emotional capacity. In 1965, the Five Freedoms framework was presented as a foundational welfare model, but over the years welfare models have moved away from resource‐based indicators to animal‐based indicators like the Five Domains Model. Recent findings emphasise that the absence of negative emotional states does not imply good welfare in a way similar to the presence of positive emotional states and that this difference should also be taken into account by these welfare assessment models. Various tools for welfare assessments in equines are described and provide a good starting point for the equine industry.

The relevance of and need for equine welfare assessments becomes clear when looking at the currently intensifying debate around equestrian sports, in which the social licence to operate (SLO) of the equine industry is questioned. This questioning has increased the awareness of the possible risks of both physical and psychological harms horses used for sports are exposed to and, combining this knowledge with the development of ethical frameworks for equestrian sports, has taken the examination of these sports to higher standards. Over the years, various studies evaluated equine welfare in different disciplines, such as Thoroughbred racing, standardbred trotting as well as at multi‐disciplinary sports such as eventing. All of these studies have provided equine regulatory bodies with tools to enhance and monitor equine welfare in a more standardised way. However, different societal opinions and personal views add complexity to the actual implementation.

Because of the rapidly increasing knowledge of the cognitive capacities of animals and their emotions, the current time may become the most transformative period in the relationship between humans and horses since domestication. Not only can the horse be expected to be at the forefront of this development because of the special bond between humans and horses, the process will also have a strong impact on the future of the equine industry. As a species, the horse not only has great athletic capabilities in terms of strength, stamina, and speed; horses have also shown to be intelligent and trainable, making them reliable yet vulnerable. Key welfare challenges arise when competition demands conflict with equine needs, forcing horses to perform outside of their physiological or mental comfort zones. Adaptability to training is a key parameter in the conditioning of (sport)horses and this is where objective monitoring of the equine athlete can play a role. Over the last 20 years, technological advances have made it possible to move from the laboratory to real‐life settings with monitoring of horses during training and competitions under field conditions, allowing for a more practical and realistic measuring environment. Current approaches to assess the mental state of the horse, including their subjective perception of their work, rely on behavioural measures such as the currently popular facial expression scoring. This approach continues to develop similarly towards practical applicability in a realistic environment.

For effective progress in assessing equine welfare, all perspectives—including the physiological and psychological experiences of the horses—must be considered. The tools to assess those welfare perspectives based on quantitative parameters are rapidly developing, thereby supporting data‐driven decisions that align with contemporary ethical standards. Artificial intelligence (AI), a prominent and upcoming field in research, has shown promise in applications such as quantitative gait analysis and could be adapted to assess a broader range of parameters. Before this can be implemented, large databases need to be established containing sufficient and reliable data to enable correct interpretation. An essential factor in the ethical use of these technologies is the objectivity of the data produced. Objective data are essential to foster transparent discussions on the use of horses in sports. Especially since objective data regarding horses' responses to workloads is critical for evaluating and justifying their roles in equestrian sports. By integrating the different monitoring technologies, it becomes possible to capture detailed, objective insights into how equine athletes respond to training and competitive demands.

To ensure the reliability of the collected data, validation of the measurement systems used is a critical component. Validation refers to the process by which a tool, method, or system is tested to perform according to its intended purpose, consistently producing accurate, reliable, and consistent results. This often involves comparing the output of the technology in question against a benchmark system, often referred to as a ‘gold standard’. Therefore, the validation status of a technology is a key point that should be considered when selecting tools to assess equine physiological or psychological responses.

This narrative review presents an overview of current technologies to measure both physiological and psychological parameters in horses during exercise and to what extent they can be used in practice. The focus will be on validated technologies, as only then can the outcome be considered proven to be correct. However, for some measurement systems that assess physiological parameters, these are not available. In those cases, we discuss technologies that are currently used or developed in research or clinical settings but can be expected to become applicable for use under field conditions in the foreseeable future.

CURRENT OPERATIONAL TOOLS TO MONITOR HORSES DURING TRAINING IN RELATION TO THEIR WELFARE AND PERFORMANCE

Parameters used for measuring physical response, training status, and performance

During exercise, various bodily processes and systems work together, requiring adaptations that are vast and often intertwined to sustain the undertaken exercise. There are six main physiological systems involved, namely the cardiovascular, respiratory, muscular, thermoregulatory, endocrine, and locomotory systems (Figure 1). The assessment of physical well‐being relies on parameters associated with these physiological systems. Insights into the body's response to exercise help to determine whether the horse is adequately adapting to the imposed workload. When abnormal or unexpected physiological responses are observed, it is imperative to adjust or stop the training to safeguard the horse's health and welfare. Recent technological advancements have facilitated the quantitative evaluation of physiological responses to exercise. The technologies available for the various physiological systems are discussed in this review.

The six physiological systems involved in exercise and related to the assessment of physiological welfare and performance.

The cardiovascular system

Heart rate (HR) and heart rate variability (HRV) are possibly the most studied parameters in exercise physiology. Depending on the objective of the data collection and on the system used, information on cardiac pathologies can be derived or additional data on heart sounds and rhythm can be collected. An electrocardiogram (ECG) is considered the gold standard for the assessment of heart rate and rhythm. The ECG measures the electric activity of the heart and allows for the calculation of the R–R interval for determination of HR and HRV. The calculation of HR and HRV needs to be done after data collection and cannot be provided real‐time. Additionally, because the ECG provides the full electrical signal containing the QRS complex and inter‐beat intervals, it allows for the detection of arrhythmias. Not only at rest, but also during exercise, the ECG has shown to be a valuable tool to assess cardiac health. A sampling frequency of 500 Hz is considered most reliable, especially when there is interest in more than only HR. There are various ECG monitors available. In equine exercise physiology research, the Televet100® (Jørgen Kruuse) is often used, as it provides good quality ECGs, is practical and portable. The Televet100® uses a 3‐lead ECG with 3 electrodes and 1 ground cable connected to a portable device that can be attached to the saddle pad/girth. Generally, signal quality decreases when speed increases due to movement artefacts, which need to be considered for correct data interpretation. Data can be collected and stored in Holter‐mode (e.g., on the device using a SD‐card) and transmitted later to a laptop or computer via Bluetooth®, or collected in the telemetric mode to transmit data to a laptop or computer in real time.

Whilst ECG is the gold standard, it can be impractical to use due to the time required to place the electrodes, the skin preparation that is needed and, depending on the parameters of interest, the need for data processing and analysis afterwards. When only heart rate is needed, wearable heart rate sensors have been suggested to be more practical. They are widely used in the field, because they are easy to use on the horse and generally provide real‐time results for interpretation. Various wearable heart rate devices are available; the most common type consists of a band or girth with electrodes that is placed over the horses' withers behind the humeroradial joint. The Polar® Equine belt (Polar Electro Oy) is widely used and consists of a textile band with plastic electrode areas together with a sensor (e.g., H10 heart rate sensor) that is clicked on the belt. The data are collected on the sensor and transmitted to a watch, tablet or smartphone with a mobile application via Bluetooth®. Although often used for HR collection, the reliability of the inter‐beat interval detection was found to be limited. A similar contact electrode band is used by Hylofit® (Hylonome LLC) in combination with a data transmitter. This band, however, is attached to a girth, making it easier to fit to horses and ponies of different sizes. At the time of writing, the manufacturer had discontinued production and support for this device. However, it may not be unlikely that a similar device will be marketed at some stage, for which reason the product was included in the review. Another way to measure equine HR is via smart‐textile bands that have imbedded electrodes on different locations in the belt, such as the Skiin Equine® (Myant Inc.) and Smartex® (Smartex srl) belts. The Skiin Equine® belt uses five 4 cm2 electrodes composed of silver and carbon‐coated yarns in a modified base‐apex configuration providing a 3‐lead ECG signal. The materials used ensure signal quality not only at rest, but also during movement. The Smartex® belt consists of two embedded electrodes providing a 1‐lead ECG together with a separate accelerometer that is attached to the belt in a pouch. Both belts are easy to use and require little preparation and use Bluetooth® for data transmission to a smartphone, tablet or laptop. The Smartex® belt has also been used to test a new algorithm to eliminate movement artefacts in the signal, which becomes essential when measuring horses in motion. An overview of the validation studies for these belts is shown in Table 1.

Overview of validated cardiac and gait analysis technologies.

Type of product	What is measured	Sampling frequency	Data visualised via	Validated for	References	 	Cardiac technologies	 	Televet 100® (Jørgen Kruuse, Marslev, Denmark)	4 Adhesive electrodes + data collection unit	3‐lead ECG: Electrical signal providing QRS complex and inter‐beat intervals	500 Hz	Specialised software from company	Rest and exercise		 	Polar® Equine (Polar Electro Oy, Kempele, Finland)	Band with embedded electrodes + transmitter	Heart rate and inter‐beat intervals	1000 Hz for collection130 Hz for HR and R‐R intervals	Application for smartphone, computer or tablet	Rest and exercise		 	Hylofit® (Hylonome LLC, Wilton, CT, USA)a	Band + transmitter	Heart rate and inter‐beat intervals	N.A.	Application for smartphone	Rest and exercise		 	Equimetre™ (Arioneo, Paris, France)	Sensor with accelerometer, gyroscope and GNSS node and band with electrode at the girth and under the saddle	1‐lead ECG: electrical signal providing QRS complex and inter‐beat intervals	450–500 Hz for ECG1 Hz for HR	Specialised software from company	Rest and exercise		 	Actiheart 5® (CamNTech, Fenstanton, UK)	Sensor with accelerometer attached to belt	1‐lead ECG: electrical signal providing QRS complex and inter‐beat intervals	Up to 1042 Hz	Specialised software from company	Rest		 	Skiin Equine® (Myant Inc., Toronto, ON, Canada)	Smart textile belt with 5 imbedded electrodes	3‐lead ECG: electrical signal providing QRS complex and inter‐beat intervals	320 Hz	Application for smartphone, computer or tablet	Rest and exercise		 	Smartex® (Smartex srl, Navacchio, Pisa, Italy)	Smart textile band with embedded electrodes + transmitter device with accelerometer	1‐lead ECG: electrical signal providing QRS complex and inter‐beat intervals	250 Hz	Application for smartphone, computer or tablet	Rest		 	eKuore® (Chip Ideas Electronics SL, Spain)	2 electrode clips + smartphone application	1‐lead ECG: electrical signal providing QRS complex and inter‐beat intervals	500 Hz	Smartphone or tablet application	Rest		 	AliveCor® (Veterinary Heart Monitor; AliveCor, San Francisco, California)	Smartphone sensor	1‐lead ECG: electrical signal providing QRS complex and inter‐beat intervals	300 Hz	Smartphone application	Rest		 	Gait analysis technologies	 	QHorse® (Qualisys AB, Gothenburg, Sweden)	3D Optical Motion Capture markers	Head, withers, pelvis vertical displacement asymmetry + hip hikeSpeed	Up to 10.000 Hz (dependent on camera‐type and settings), but 100–200 Hz mostly used	Computer software	Walk, trot		 	Equi‐Pro® (Inertia Technology B.V., Enschede, the Netherlands)	7 or 9 IMU sensors (more sensors can be added)	Head, withers, pelvis vertical displacement asymmetry + hip hikeLimb variablesAutomatic gait detectionDirection + surface classificationSpeed (with GNSS)	100, 200, 500, and 1000 Hz	Computer or tablet application	Walk, trot, canter, pace, tolt (in‐hand and ridden)		 	Lameness Locator® (Equinosis LLC, Columbia, MO, USA)	3 sensors: (2 accelerometers +1 gyroscope)	Head and pelvis vertical displacement asymmetry and stride segmentation	200 Hz	Tablet application	Trot (in‐hand and ridden)		 	EquiGait® (EquiGait Ltd., UK)	5 IMU sensors (rider or spinal kinematics can be added)	Head, withers, pelvis vertical displacement asymmetry + hip hike	100 Hz	Computer or tablet application	Walk, trot, canter		 	Move Pro® (Alogo Swiss Technology, Renens, Switzerland)	Sensor (IMU + GPS)	Position and speed via sternum	100 Hz	Computer, tablet or smartphone application	Trot, canter, jumping		 	Sleip® (Sleip AI, Stockholm, Sweden)	Computer vision (AI) based markerless tracking using smartphone video	Head and pelvis movement tracking	60 Hz	Smartphone application	Trot

Abbreviations: AI, artificial intelligence; ECG, electrocardiogram; GNSS, Global Navigation Satellite System; GPS, global positioning system; IMU, inertial measurement unit.

This company does no longer produce or support these products, and the brand is no longer existent. As it is not unlikely that a similar device will be marketed in the near future, the product was retained in the table.

Sensors that can be attached to belts or girths have also been developed. The Actiheart 5® (CamNTech) is a sensor with an accelerometer and a 1‐lead ECG device; it has internal storage, and data can be uploaded to the corresponding software application. The EquiMetre™ (Arioneo) combines ECG data with information on speed and locomotion thanks to added accelerometers and Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) sensors. Data are transmitted via Bluetooth® to a mobile application, where summary measures of the raw data can be analysed and watched in real‐time. The eKuore® system (Chip Ideas Electronics SL) provides a 1‐lead ECG signal measured via two electrode clips attached to the horse's skin. Via an application on a smartphone or tablet, the ECG signal can be viewed. The development of new technologies has also made it possible to obtain ECG data directly from smartphone sensors, such as AliveCor® (Veterinary Heart Monitor; AliveCor). These smartphone‐based sensors operate by positioning the device in direct contact with the horse's girth region. Both the eKuore® and the AliveCor® system have only been validated at rest. It can be reasoned that these devices may be less practical for data collection during exercise due to the horse's movement, which can result in motion‐related artefacts.

When choosing a system, it is important to consider the sampling frequency. Equine HR can vary from 28 beats/min at rest corresponding to 0.5 Hz, up to 220 beats/min or 3.7 Hz depending on the type of exercise being undertaken. The sampling theorem states that the sampling frequency should be at least twice the frequency you want to measure. For more detailed information, such as quantification of the ECG and its inter‐beat intervals, a higher sampling frequency is needed as used by most devices (Table 1). Standardisation protocols and different threshold levels for rest and exercise are fundamental to correct result interpretation. Most of the methods discussed require minimal preparation. Skin preparation in terms of clipping or skin cleaning is often not required (unless horses have a long coat) and the use of water or conductive gel to enhance signal quality is optional depending on the system yet enhances signal quality. Following data acquisition, most devices support data processing using proprietary software or allow export to specialised platforms such as Kubios® (Kubios HRV, University of Eastern Finland) for advanced analysis. Kubios® is a tool that can be used for various actions, such as artefact removal from raw data prior to analysis. An overview of the validated systems can be found in Table 1 and a product link overview of the various devices can be found in the Data S1.

The respiratory system

The respiratory system can be considered as an under‐represented system in terms of measurements during exercise. Over the years, measuring respiratory rate or identifying respiratory pathologies during exercise in a practical setting has proven difficult, even though it may be the limiting factor affecting performance. At rest, respiratory rate is monitored mostly by visually counting the number of abdominal movements during inhalation and exhalation. However, as soon as the horse starts to move, this approach becomes less feasible. In clinical settings, spirometry, respiratory ultrasound, plethysmography, and overground endoscopies are tools frequently used to identify airway pathologies, such as equine asthma, epiglottic entrapment, exercise‐induced pulmonary haemorrhage, and dorsal displacement of the soft palate. Of these techniques, overground endoscopy has proven very useful for the identification of pathologies that only manifest during exercise. Although validated, none of the techniques have been developed for daily monitoring of healthy horses, for which they would be very impractical anyhow, as veterinary intervention is needed to apply them.

Various types of ventilation masks have been developed. Yet, these are still mostly used in research settings due to their labour‐intensive handling and lack of mobility. Further, horses have to be trained and acclimated to accept the masks. Another way of quantifying respiration is by the analysis of respiratory sounds, since these have shown to be promising in identifying poor performers and pathologies. Determination of the in‐ or expiratory sound using spectral analysis (Figure 2) of microphone data is promising for field measurements due to the practical and non‐invasive nature. The downside is that data processing currently requires extensive manual work. However, when automated, processing time can be reduced, greatly enhancing practical implementation.

Example of an omni‐directional microphone attached to the nose of the horse (left) and coherent spectrogram (right). The spectrogram shows a visual representation of the frequency content of the sound over time. The top line (blue waves) shows the sound signal, and the bottom line shows the matching spectrogram. Lighter colours indicate more ‘loudness’ or higher amplitudes. Exhalation events are marked with black squares. Copyright: J.I.M. Parmentier (Utrecht University) and R.M. Aarts (Utrecht University).

Other technologies such as infrared thermography (IRT) and millimetre wave radar technologies have been shown to be capable of measuring respiratory rate in a standing horse at rest. However, movement of the horse decreased the reliability of the data and was identified as a problem making it difficult to implement these techniques during exercise. Additionally, there are companies that have developed smart‐textile bands with embedded piezo‐electronic sensors that measure thoracic expansion. These wearable bands are used in human athletes successfully but have not been validated in horses. The positioning of these bands on horses behind the elbow and over the withers, together with limited expansion movement in the chest and abdominal area caused by respiration in horses, as well as the possible interference with tack, make it questionable if these bands can be reliably used in horses.

The thermoregulatory system

During exercise, heat production increases due to heightened metabolic and muscular activity. Effective thermoregulation is critical to prevent the detrimental effects of hyperthermia/overheating and sustain physical performance. The amount of heat generated depends on several factors, including environmental conditions, the degree of acclimatisation, exercise type, the horse's training status, and body condition. Body temperature regulation occurs primarily through evaporation (sweating and respiration), and to a lesser extent by convection and radiation. It can be assessed by measuring core body temperature, rectal temperature, or skin temperature.

Core body or internal body temperature can be measured in blood vessels, per rectum, and in the gastrointestinal tract (GIT). However, core body temperature varies depending on the measured location. Telemetry‐based core body temperature monitoring using a pill‐shaped sensor inserted into the gastrointestinal tract via nasal tubing showed significantly different temperatures when compared with rectal temperature measured via a hand‐held thermistor or blood temperature measured via catheterisation of the jugular vein. Use in the field of these methods is possible but remains impractical because of the need for veterinary intervention. Rectally inserted sensors (proximally 25 cm deep) can be used too during exercise tests and prove to provide valuable information on equine body temperature regulation in a more practical manner. However, insertion of these sensors can cause stress in the horse, which should be taken into account.

Skin temperature, for which the measurement is argued to be less invasive, is influenced by external factors and is not a reliable substitute for core body temperature. A non‐contact infra‐red thermometer showed a low agreement in body temperature compared with a digital rectal thermometer. Infra‐red cameras have been used to monitor skin temperature in endurance horses during exercise but were found unsuitable as a proxy for core temperature due to their sensitivity to environmental conditions.

Another interesting parameter is sweat rate, which is a proxy for heat dissipation. Horses exhibit a high sweat capacity as it is their primary means of thermoregulation alongside respiration. Sweat rate can be quantified through hygrometry, a method to measure air humidity, by using a hygrometer locally on the equine skin to quantify evaporative losses. Other ways to determine sweat rate are direct sweat collection or by assessing body water loss during exercise. The latter is often calculated as the difference in bodyweight before and after exercise, adjusted for water lost via respiration and faecal and/or urinary excretion. However, this method provides only an estimate. Variations in sweating patterns across different body regions complicate the use of localised sweat patches to estimate total sweat loss accurately. These findings highlight that, while current technologies offer some insights into equine thermoregulation, many methods remain limited by practicality and susceptibility to external influences, underscoring the need for further refinement of measurement techniques.

The locomotory system

In a biomechanical sense, locomotion can be investigated by the assessment of kinetics and kinematics. Kinetic analysis focuses on the measurement of the forces generated by locomotion, mostly the ground reaction forces, and kinematic analysis describes the movement of the study subject (or parts thereof) in its environment, described in terms of translation and rotations in the three planes of an orthogonal Cartesian coordinate system. This review focuses on kinematic analysis, as there are no techniques yet to measure kinetics in a practical way under field conditions.

Kinematic locomotion parameters have been used for ages to assess equine performance and the presence of lameness. The classic visual clinical assessment that relies on the detection of asymmetries has been supplemented in more recent times by various technologies that aim at doing the same in a quantitative way. In trot, the upper body (head, withers, pelvis) of the horse moves upwards and downwards twice during a stride cycle, generating a sinusoidal pattern. This pattern becomes asymmetrical in the presence of lameness and can be measured objectively. Technologies used for this vary widely depending on the parameters of interest, location, and resources. Optimal motion capture (OMC) systems, such as Qhorse® (Qualisys AB) use 3D motion cameras and reflective markers on the horse and are considered the industry gold standard. The QHorse® system has good precision and accuracy and, although it is location‐dependent and data analysis and processing can be time‐consuming, the system performs very well in clinical or research settings.

In recent years, various Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU)‐based technologies have been developed and validated to measure locomotion parameters in horses. An IMU sensor contains at least one accelerometer, a gyroscope, and may contain a magnetometer and a Global Positioning System (GPS) sensor. IMUs are currently frequently used as wearables in equine gait analysis; the number and type of sensors depend on the system and sometimes can be adapted according to need. The Lameness Locator® (Equinosis LLC) is a system that measures the vertical displacement of the head and pelvis in trot using one gyroscope and two accelerometers. Information is transferred from the sensors to a tablet via Bluetooth. The EquiGait® system (EquiGait Ltd., UK) uses five IMU sensors; however, the number of sensors in the system can be adjusted if desired. This not only allows for the monitoring of the head, withers, sacrum, and tuber coxae, but also allows for back motion monitoring in trot. For this system, information is transferred via Bluetooth® or WiFi from the sensors to a tablet or laptop. Another system, the Equi‐Pro® system (Inertia Technology B.V.), is a result of the research project EquiMoves and utilises seven or nine IMU sensors located not only on the upper body, but also on the legs, allowing for information on leg‐specific parameters in all gaits, such as stride length, stride frequency, and pro‐ and retraction angle. When a GNSS node is added, speed can be measured. One of the newest systems is the Move Pro® (Alogo Swiss Technology), which uses an IMU combined with a GPS sensor measuring acceleration on the x, y, and z axis to determine speed and position. With this information, it provides information on jumping characteristics and kinematics between and during jumps.

The rapid development of AI has enabled new insights and opportunities. Using kinematic information from the upper body alone or combined with leg parameters, the use of artificial neural network models resulted in reliable prediction of ground reaction force (GRFz) curves and peak values. It also has enabled marker‐less monitoring of equine locomotion. A smartphone application Sleip® (Sleip AI) uses AI to track specific key points on the horse using the camera of a smartphone and has proven successful and especially easy to implement in practice. Currently, Sleip® provides information on upper‐body (e.g., head and pelvis) vertical displacement synchronised with limb movements, but no information is given on withers displacement or limb kinematics. When compared with an IMU‐based system, agreement between locomotor symmetry parameters for trot in a straight line on a hard surface was quite high for the downward vertical displacement of the head (k = 0.80) but low for pelvic movement (k = 0.12). The authors mentioned a difference in lameness thresholds for both systems and gave the lower number of hindlimb/pelvic data (video imaging with the mobile phone allows only for hindlimb/pelvic data to be collected when the horse is trotting away) as an explanation.

For all these sensor‐based techniques, the data need processing and analysing and thus filtering is important to remove unwanted components in the signal since this can affect the results and thus data interpretation. Additionally, sampling frequency is important to keep in mind. For vertical displacement a sampling frequency of 50 Hz resulted in <2 mm errors and this increased with lower sampling frequencies. When using gait analysis, the type of system used needs to be considered carefully and matched with both the measuring environment and the purpose of the measurement. Output parameters may differ between clinical and scientific purposes and therefore need to be considered when choosing a suitable system. Table 1 provides an overview of the gait analysis systems, and a product link overview of the various devices can be found in Data S2.

The muscular system

The muscles of the horse are obviously pivotal for any form of exercise; hence performance and welfare issues will arise in case of muscular dysfunction. Despite this, means for monitoring muscle function in the field during exercise are limited. Most techniques have been developed for clinical or research environments. Depending on the suspected cause of muscle dysfunction, measurement of muscle enzymes in peripheral blood, genetic testing, imaging (ultrasonography, radiography) electromyography (EMG) or muscle biopsies can provide more details on the cause and further treatment. Muscle biopsies have shown to be of great value in determining muscular response to training. Unfortunately, muscle biopsies require invasive sampling and subsequent laboratory analyses, making them less suitable for field measurements. Technological developments envisaging standardisation and automatic processing of muscle biopsies and making the procedure less invasive are ongoing.

The most commonly used parameter in relation to exercise physiology is lactate. It is produced in the muscles yet relates to almost all physiological systems: regulated via the endocrine system, produced in the muscles, transported via the cardiovascular system, affecting the respiratory system via the acid–base balance, measured in blood or plasma and able to affect locomotion. Production of lactate occurs in the muscle when anaerobic energy pathways are utilised; hence, it is the gold standard for the identification of the aerobic to anaerobic switch in muscular activity and is measured via blood sampling. Due to its relevance for exercise and training status, there are several portable lactate analysers available, which can easily be used in the field. Validation against laboratory analysis showed good correlations of these portable lactate analysers, especially in the low to moderate range up to 8–10 mmol/L. For high values (maximum exercise) bench top laboratory analysers should be used. Where the analysers are valuable tools for welfare and training monitoring in the field, the procedure obviously still remains invasive and requires veterinary involvement. This drawback can possibly be overcome using infrared thermography, which is advocated as a tool to indirectly measure lactate; however, more research is needed to identify the best regions of interest and to determine repeatability and reliability of the procedure.

Little is known on muscle activity during movement and how the real‐time interaction with exercise is. Electromyography measures the motor unit action potentials associated with muscle activity during motion and is of interest for studying activation patterns, muscle recruitment, and fatigue. There are two types of EMG: needle EMG and surface EMG. Needle EMG is invasive, and the use of surface EMG remains limited to research settings (Figure 3) due to the lack of standardisation protocols for the necessary advanced signal processing in the horse. The systems used for sEMG measurements in horses are medical grade systems for muscle activity measurements originally used in human research. They can be wireless or wired systems with a preferred sampling frequency of 2000 Hz and can only be used in combination with kinematic data to ensure proper data interpretation.

Facial movement and expression tracking using machine learning in humans (left photo; adapted from Timme and Brand) and in horses (right photo; adapted from Kim and Cho). Both methods identify key areas of the face—marked via the squares in the image—to increase our understanding of emotions depicted via facial expressions.

The endocrine system

The endocrine system is an important regulator in the body and governs many of the other physiological systems that are described above through feedback loops. The endocrine system encompasses various endocrine glands with their respective hormones. Technologies to monitor the endocrine system during exercise or even at rest are scarce, as the need for invasive blood sampling and extensive laboratory analyses makes it difficult to develop practical, non‐invasive applications. Therefore, no further technologies are named here.

Parameters used for measuring mental well‐being and stress levels

Exercise involves both physical effort and emotional challenges that can impact an athlete's well‐being. In human sports science, it is recognised that physical activity enhances both physiological fitness and emotional well‐being. However, when exercise becomes too strenuous it can result in negative emotions and mental stress in humans and horses. Regardless, the horse's mental experience in equestrian sports is poorly understood compared with human athletes. We know that the horse's temperament, mood, and emotional reactions affect equine performance. Additionally, the essential human‐horse interaction is complicated and despite the positive effects riders experience when undertaking activities with their equine partner, this might not always be mutual, since (sport)horses experience one or multiple mental stressors related to transport, housing, diet, but also the intensity of exercise and training methods.

The assessment of the equine emotional state is challenging; and a set of objective descriptors or parameters would be needed to understand the psychological responses horses have during exercise. The most used methods to understand equine emotion are linked to displayed behaviours using behavioural tests and ethograms. The drawback of these methods is their reliance on human visual scoring, making the assessment subjective. Various facial pain scores and discomfort scores have been developed over the years, yet the focus has been mostly on measuring horses at rest or standing still, like in stables or other controlled environments.

The use of behaviours to assess equine mental state during exercise is far from straightforward. The development of the ridden horse pain ethogram, an ethogram allowing for behavioural scoring during ridden exercise and developed to identify musculoskeletal pain in horses, is one of the attempts to develop tools that address this complexity. Here the focus lies on scoring facial expressions, ear movement, tail movement, and more complex behaviours such as bucking or rearing. Another ethogram, focussed solely on facial expression in the ridden horse, showed that the eyes and muzzle area were the parameters that were most inconsistently scored. Unfortunately, the physiological response to exercise itself triggers a stress response in the body and, when ridden, there are many other factors than musculoskeletal pain that can affect the horse's behaviour, such as rider skills, faulty equipment and level of training that need to be considered when using the ridden horse ethogram.

Facial expressions and body behaviours have been shown to be associated with orthopaedic pain in horses at rest. However, the reliability of the facial expression scores was lower than the reliability of behavioural parameters. This corresponds with a study in Thoroughbred racehorses in which the authors looked at facial scores during trot‐ups, where inconsistent associations between lameness and facial scores were found, suggesting that it might be even more difficult to score pain based on facial expressions and behaviours during motion than at rest.

Facial movement and expression tracking using machine learning techniques during exercise showed to be possible in humans and is of interest in horses too. Facial tracking and identification of important facial areas, such as the eye and mouth area, to determine pain or stress in horses at rest is already done using machine learning but not during exercise. The difficulty here is that it is unknown how exercise alone, without the presence of pain, influences the facial expressions of horses. In humans, it has been found that exercise affects facial expressions. Specific facial expressions, like open mouth and nose wrinkles, became more prominent towards exertion during an incremental exercise test in humans and negative reactions to exercise‐related stimuli were more prominent than positive ones. The automated recognition of pain using computer vision and machine learning in horses is currently advancing, yet the understanding of external stimuli on pain‐related behaviour still needs a better basis. The interpretation of equine facial expression during exercise remains a potentially highly relevant but largely unexplored area. To fill this gap, large amounts of data in the form of images or videos of exercising horses are necessary to train computer vision and machine learning‐based models. The creation of these datasets could be done using tracking cameras in arenas or in treadmill settings. Other than external parameters like facial expressions or behaviours, there are several internal or physiological parameters that are measurable on the horse during exercise that have been shown to be potentially linked to its mental or affective state.

The cardiovascular system

Physiological parameters such as HR and HRV have been used frequently in horses to determine how they experience given situations. HR measured via an equine HR belt was used in police horses to monitor their stress response and HRV measured with another type of HR belt was used to measure the equine perception of the horse–human interaction. It should be noted that an increased HR does not always mean a negative experience (like fear or anxiety) but can also just be caused by exercise and/or workload itself or (sub)clinical disease leading to poor performance. It can be evaluated by comparing the measured values to the expected or reference values for a specific situation (e.g., at rest or exercise‐type). In research, differentiation between the physiological or emotional HR responses to stimuli lies mostly in the set‐up of the experiment. For the physiological response, standardised exercise tests are frequently used, whereas for the emotional response, behavioural tests or observations are added to the cardiovascular response. The technologies to measure HR and/or HRV are identical to those when monitoring this just from a physiological perspective described earlier.

The endocrine system

The presence of a stress response is the most often used parameter for assessing the mental state in horses, with cortisol as the principal parameter. Physiological endogenous cortisol release displays diurnal variation and may be affected by pathologies. Interestingly, cortisol can be measured in blood (serum/plasma), saliva, faeces, and hair. Depending on the nature of the sample, information on stress levels can be acquired: plasma cortisol offers insights in acute stress, salivary cortisol provides more continuous monitoring, and cortisol levels in hair offer long‐term assessment. Salivary cortisol showed a good agreement with serum cortisol, making it a viable and less‐invasive tool to measure. Salivary cortisol showed to increase most on the first day of a 3‐day competition event in both dressage and showjumping horses and high cortisol levels were found in horses subjected to high‐intensity multi‐day eventing competitions. The latter study also showed that cortisol increased with increasing exercise intensity or duration, suggesting that intense exercise acts as a stressor in horses, which needs to be considered when assessing equine mental state. Next to salivary cortisol, faecal cortisol metabolites were also found to be positively correlated with plasma cortisol levels, indicating that this could be a potential indicator of systemic cortisol levels in horses.

Oxytocin is a hormone linked to social bonding and to positive emotional states. However, oxytocin release is also influenced by fear, panic, or maximal exercise, and in horses, anaerobic exercise slows down oxytocin release. In young horses, salivary oxytocin was identified as a promising marker for emotional responses to training, since oxytocin levels decreased when horses experience mental or physical discomfort and increased when horses experience positive interactions with the trainer. Laboratory analysis remains necessary, since oxytocin is found in blood or saliva, making it less practical for on‐site measurements. In contrast to HR or HRV, there are no wearable technologies available to measure cortisol or oxytocin levels directly, since all mentioned methods require laboratory tests to determine the levels of cortisol.

The central nervous system

Parameters such as eye temperature and spontaneous blink rate (SBR) have been correlated to stress responses such as HRV and cortisol levels. Eye temperature measured via IRT showed that noseband tightness not only affected HR and HRV, but also increased the eye temperature. Similarly, eye temperature was measured in sport horses during multiple day events to identify stress. Eye temperature measurements are prone to errors due to the influence of the region of interest and external factors, such as environmental temperature, and a correlation with HR and cortisol is not always found. In a validation study, the medial canthus region of the eye was found most suitable for eye temperature measurements, but also here no correlations were found with HR. SBR is another parameter that has met with more interest recently. It can be measured using (high definition) cameras focused on the eye of interest. It has been correlated to HRV and cortisol and has been shown to decrease in stressful environments. Although these eye‐related parameters appear promising, further research is needed to fully understand these responses and to standardise the measurement protocols to ensure that data can be correctly interpreted and are comparable between studies. Camera angle and positioning, for example, were found to affect eye temperature readings, highlighting the importance of validated protocols. Especially the use outside of research settings requires practical considerations and agreement on the standardisation of camera placements and data analysis before machine learning can play a role in the future.

Based on the evidence presented, it can be concluded that a variety of tools are available to infer information about how horses experience specific situations (Table 2). However, these methodologies rely on indirect measurements of the equine mental state or subjective interpretations and often require laboratory analysis. Each approach extrapolates physiological markers or behavioural indicators to represent emotional states. Given the inherent limitations such as the current inability to directly communicate with horses, accurately measure neural processes, or precisely interpret equine facial expressions during exercise, further research is essential to advance understanding of the equine perception of its environment and mental state during exercise.

Overview of technologies used for mental‐state assessments.

Parameter of interest	Measured in/via	Equipment	Validation	References	 	Cardiac system					 	Heart rate	ECG or inter‐beat intervals	See Table 1	Yes	See Table 1	 	Heart rate variability	Inter‐beat intervals	See Table 1	Yes	See Table 1	 	Endocrine systema					 	Cortisol	Blood	Blood sample	N.A.		 		Saliva	Swabs	N.A.		 		Faeces	Faecal sample	N.A.		 		Hair	Hair sample	N.A.		 	Oxytocin	Blood	Blood sample	N.A.		 		Saliva	Swabs	N.A.		 	Central nervous system					 	Eye temperature	Eye‐region	Infra‐red thermography	Yes		 	Spontaneous blinking rate	Eye‐region	Video imaging	Yes		 	Facial expressions		Computer vision/machine learning/deep learning	Yes

Abbreviation: ECG, electrocardiogram.

Parameters of the endocrine system are measured via laboratory analysis. Validation of the laboratory equipment is outside the scope of this review; thus, studies are named that used one or more of these parameters in horses.

FUTURE PERSPECTIVES ON EQUINE MONITORING UNDER FIELD CONDITIONS

Wearable technologies continue to emerge and will be a viable approach for practical on‐site monitoring of horses in the real world. Cardiac monitoring, like HR and HRV, is already possible with current technologies, and gait analysis systems have shown massive developments in recent years. Wearable technologies that can provide real‐time information on both the locomotor and cardiac systems are being developed, allowing for a more comprehensive assessment of the horse's response to exercise. Additionally, new technologies are also being tested. An example is non‐invasive HR monitoring using a wearable photoplethysmography sensor on the tail. This technology uses a light‐based optical sensor to measure blood volume variations in an artery, as is often used in human smartwatches, and was able to detect the HR at rest. In terms of exercise intensity monitoring, blood lactate is the gold standard, which is currently still determined via invasive blood sampling. In humans, percutaneous micro needle patches for lactate monitoring are developed and used. These small patches are applied to the skin and can monitor lactate levels continuously. This technology has not yet been developed for, nor tested on horses; however, its potential application in the future presents an intriguing prospect. It should be realised, however, that the unique characteristics of equine skin, including the presence of hair and sweat, may pose adherence challenges that are not typically encountered in humans. In areas where laboratory analysis is still essential, such as endocrine‐related responses, the development of portable or hand‐held devices like the ones currently existing for lactate will enhance on‐site monitoring. Additionally, the collection of salivary samples for endocrine information can be enhanced by the development of new tools, such as modified bits to collect salivary samples.

Advanced novel data collection systems are anticipated to evolve towards easier applicable formats offering novel insights into both the physical and mental state of horses. An example is sEMG that, once adapted to use in the field, will deeply enhance the understanding of equine muscle dynamics. The usefulness of such a device for the monitoring of physical health will be evident. A new application for sEMG to assess the equine emotional state is currently explored through the quantification of muscular activity related to facial expressions as a reaction to positive or negative stimuli. However, prior to practical integration, it is crucial to advance scientific understanding of the data generated by this technology, followed by the development of standardised protocols.

The development of tools for in‐the‐field monitoring will play a pivotal role in driving the use of technologies for longitudinal assessment. Existing technologies for gait analysis, including sensor‐based and AI‐driven systems, facilitate efficient data collection and enable frequent monitoring, enhancing the detection of subtle changes in gait patterns or asymmetries. New devices able to measure kinetics, such as force‐measuring horseshoes, or AI techniques using algorithms to reliably calculate ground reaction forces from kinematic data could be developed. The integration of these technologies into training or even competitive settings remains a future prospect, but the combination of multiple technological approaches could provide a more comprehensive evaluation of the physiological load experienced by horses.

Advancements are not only expected in the physical domain but also in the monitoring of the equine mental state, an area gaining increased significance. Given the critical importance of the reliable and repeatable assessment of equine welfare, technologies designed to assess and monitor equine mental states are likely to be developed and refined. The use of AI, including deep learning and machine learning, will be imperative. Equine behavioural research generates large amounts of data, especially when video imaging is used. Once sufficient large sets of validated data have been collected from behavioural ethograms or facial monitoring, AI can substantially contribute in terms of data processing and interpretation, further accelerating data analysis and allowing for novel technologies to emerge, similarly to what happened in the gait analysis field. A better understanding of equine emotions is relevant for all who work with horses, yet at present remains a difficult and subjective area.

CONCLUSION

A broad range of technologies is currently available for practical, real‐world monitoring within the physical domain. Particularly, the cardiac and locomotory systems have suitable options, whereas the respiratory and muscular systems lag behind in terms of practical application. Further development of existing technologies is promising, especially with more advancements in real‐time monitoring and practicality. Assessment of the equine mental state is gaining importance as a field of research matching its relevance for the equestrian industry, facilitated by rapid technological advances, with most progress expected in automated facial expression analysis. The development of portable devices capable of measuring endocrine responses on‐site, combined with the creation of large databases and subsequent use of artificial intelligence to improve and facilitate data processing and interpretation, will also contribute to more precise and timely monitoring of human–horse interactions together with the equine response to training, both mentally and physically.

FUNDING INFORMATION

The contribution of R.M. Aarts was funded by a European research fund (Eurostars: E!114697).

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT

The authors declare no conflicting interests.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Rhana Mackie Aarts: Writing – original draft; writing – review and editing; conceptualization; investigation. Esther W. Siegers: Writing – original draft; writing – review and editing; supervision; conceptualization. Filipe M. Serra Braganca: Conceptualization; writing – review and editing; supervision. P. René van Weeren: Supervision; writing – original draft; writing – review and editing; conceptualization.

DATA INTEGRITY STATEMENT

No new data were created or analysed in this study.

Supporting information

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analysed in this study.